Application to implement the concept of **security domains** in a [Nebula](https://github.com/slackhq/nebula) network. The project had been developed for the course of [Cybersecurity M](https://www.unibo.it/it/didattica/insegnamenti/insegnamento/2023/472685) of the University of Bologna.
Full documentation can be found [here](https://github.com/Lombax99/nebulaProject/tree/main/Doc)
##### Security Domain definition
A **security domain** is a set of logically related resources that can communicate and subject to the following constraints:
- A resource can have multiple **security domains**
- The information related to the **security domain** must be present in the resource's digital certificate
- A resource can open a connection only toward another resource that share at least one **security domain** otherwise it is blocked by default
##### Goal
The purpose of the application is to automatically generate all the configuration files needed to implement the provided configuration.
A single file should contain all the necessary information.

### Introduction
Nebula is an overlay networking tool designed to be fast, secure, and scalable. Connect any number of hosts with on-demand, encrypted tunnels that work across any IP networks and without opening firewall ports.
The goal of the project is to implement the logic of **Security Domain** using the tool that Nebula gives us and automate the process of converting high level logic into configuration files and rules for the nodes of the virtual network.
Although partially implemented for ease of use and testing purposes the project will not focus on automatic generation of configuration that are not involved in the concept of **Security Domain**, remote deployment and hosts security.

All tests will run on virtual machines generated through [Vagrant](https://developer.hashicorp.com/vagrant/tutorials/getting-started) running Debian 12 (Bookworm64) operating system and virtualized with VirtualBox.
The machines will be configured to run on different subnets, an additional machine will act as a router and will allow all others to connect to the vm lighthouse simulating the public internet. All VagrantFiles are available in the official documentation on [github](https://github.com/Lombax99/nebulaProject).

The project was divided into three parts, in the first part a first basic working prototype was developed, in the second part the problem was completely reanalyzed from which a second version was developed, in the third part starting from an edge case the prototype was extended with new features to handle it. 
### The first version
#### Implementing Security Domains
For firewall configuration Nebula uses a logic of default deny on top of which allow rules are added. 
To implement Security Domains I relied on Nebula's "group" feature.
With the group feature I can define a group for each security domain, assign the hosts to those groups and set them to allow connections only from nodes that share at least one group. Rules are defined with the following syntax:
```YAML
firewall:
  outbound_action: drop
  inbound_action: drop

  ...

  outbound:     #allow any connection generated by this host
    - port: any
      proto: any
      host: any

  inbound:      #allow only connections that are from a member of SecDom 1 o 2
    - port: any
      proto: any
      group:
        - SecDom1
	
	- port: any
      proto: any
      group:
        - SecDom2
```
#### Configuration file
For simplicity in this first version I will use the JSON format to define the Security Domain configuration, each host will be defined as an object in a list with all the parameters needed to generate the config file and the key certificate pair.
```JSON
[
	{
		"name": "laptop1",
		"nebula_ip": "192.168.100.11/24",
		"machine_ip": "192.168.2.11",
		"security_domains": ["LaptopSD", "ServerSD"]
	},
	...
]
```
Complete file [here](https://github.com/Lombax99/nebulaProject/blob/main/NebulaAppV1/esempio1.json)
#### Software
In this first version working on linux I developed a script that would generate the configuration files with the appropriate rules.
The full script can be found [here](https://github.com/Lombax99/nebulaProject/blob/main/NebulaAppV1/generateSD.sh)

### The second version
In the previous sprint we saw that using the group feature of nebula allows us to implements all the nebula security domains as needed by requirements.
The solution implemented though, as all the first ideas, is not the best. Here I've reanalyze the project from a top-down perspective and implemented a new solution. 
Following are the main aspects I've focused on with the respective conclusions.
#### Single Responsibility principle
In the previous configuration file we had to define on top of all the hosts and the Security Domains other data like lighthouse and hosts IP, the reason being that we asked the script to generate all certificates and keys on top of the configuration files that had to then be modified. From a project point of view we asked a singe script to do everything. Let's reanalyze the process and see how to handle it better.
The workflow of the system can be defined with the following points:
1) The Security Domain config file is created
2) Certification and Keys are created for every node of the network
3) Configuration files are created for every host
4) Configuration files are modified to implements Security Domain logic
5) All generated files are distributed to the hosts
By separating the creation of keys, certificates and configuration files from the modification to implement the firewall rules we could simplify the nebula Security Domain config file.
#### Configuration file format
In the first prototype we used JSON as the technology to define the Security Domains configuration file but we have other options to choose from.
Of the existing technologies the most common are JSON, YAML (used by nebula itself) and TOML:
- JSON is perhaps the simplest and most intuitive
- YAML seems the most suitable solution being used by nebula itself
- TOML is newer than the previous ones and represents a simpler version of YAML
After some research my choice still falls on JSON for the following reasons:
- YAML is much more complex and error prone than one might think (see the [yaml document from hell](https://ruudvanasseldonk.com/2023/01/11/the-yaml-document-from-hell) for reference)
- TOML despite being more secure than YAML is not particularly intuitive
- JSON is intuitive, much less error prone (for now the file has to be generated by hand so this is a big plus) and it is always possible to convert from JSON to YAML, the opposite is not necessarily true.

Regarding the arrangement of the data in the file, two paths can be followed:
1) I write a list of security domains, in each domain I define the list of hosts that belong to it.
	ADVANTAGES:
		- More intuitive for the user when defining the network
		- Easily answers questions such as "who belongs to this SecDom?"
2) I write a list of hosts, in each host I define the list of security domains to which it belongs (as it was in the first prototype).
	ADVANTAGES:
		- Easier to implement at the code level
		- Easier to answer questions such as "which SecDom does this host belong to?"
Obviously User Friendliness takes precedence over everything else, so the first point is also the best.

A couple of notes:
- As defined above the only data that should appear in the file are the IDs of the Hosts and the SecDoms to which they belong, data such as IPs and special parameters aren't needed and should not be part of it.
- Host IDs and Security Domain names need not to be unique for this project however making them so is not only good practice but would facilitate everything and benefit the end user.
- As intuitive as it is JSON, automatically generating the config would remove the problem (at least in part) of a poorly written file, this however would involve having an application to manage the network with GUI and all, that is currently beyond the scope of this project and will be left as a possible future extension.
#### Can a Lighthouse be part of a security domain?
A lighthouse still needs the same files as any other host; steps 2, 3, and 5 of the workflow are therefore necessary for it as well; the question remains whether a lighthouse can be part of a Security Domain or not.
Given the nature of Nebula, every host (except in extremely special cases) must be able to connect at least once to a lighthouse to function properly.

It is therefore clear that every host in the network should be able to connect to a lighthouse, for situations where there is only one lighthouse, limiting its connection would be a serious mistake. However in Nebula it is possible to implement several lighthouses and in that case it might be possible. 
However, I still believe that i would not a good practice for the simple reason that the main benefit in denying access to a lighthouse would be for the purpose of redistributing the workload in the network but to do so nebula already has better tools, on top of that it is not the job of Security Domains to take care of it.

Little extra: nebula communicates with peer-to-peer encrypting, it is not possible to sniff the traffic passing through the lighthouse, also in case of an attack one could consider blocking certain hosts from communicating with the lighthouse but it is not the task of this project to handle such a case.

Final answer then is no, but practically speaking i can't block a user from putting a node called "lighthouse" in the config, i will at least print some warning telling them it's not a good practice.
#### What about scalability?
As the number of nodes increases, the complexity in the JSON file increases linearly as does the file creation time.
#### Software
Using a linux script has several limitations:
- It is not easily portable to other platforms and/or architectures (if not impossible).
- It exploits "jq" a tool not necessarily present, in order to ensure execution it would require automatic installation and consequently sudo permission which normally aren't needed.
- It's monolithic.
For the new version we will use a programming language that is deployable on different platforms and organized as much as possible in components.
My choice falls on Python for ease of use and familiarity.
### Design
In this case we need 3 security domains, one for the laptops, one for the servers and one for connecting to the server.
The configuration file ([[NebulaAppV2/securityDomains.json|securityDomains]]) is defined as follows:
```JSON
[
    {
        "name": "serverSD",
        "hosts": ["server1", "server2"]
    },

    {
        "name": "serverAccessSD",
        "hosts": ["server1", "laptop1", "laptop2"]
    },

    {
        "name": "laptopSD",
        "hosts": ["laptop1", "laptop2", "laptop3"]
    }
]
```

The main class mirrors the 5-point structure defined earlier to which a number of initial checks on parameters, files, and data are appended.
Almost all functions are placed in a try-catch construct to handle errors in the provided files.
[[NebulaAppV2/PythonCode/generateSD.py|generateSD.py]]
``` python
def main():
	
    #1 checks if files are correct
    checkParam()
    
       #load host configuration
    try:
        hostsSetupFile = open(sys.argv[1])
        hostsSetupData = json.load(hostsSetupFile)
    except:
        print("...") 
        exit(1)
	
       #load SecDom configuration
    try:
        securityDomainsFile = open(sys.argv[2])
        securityDomainsData = json.load(securityDomainsFile)
    except:
        print("...")
        exit(1)
	
       #checks if lighthouse is in a SecDom, if it is print a warning
    try:
        if SD.hasLightouse(securityDomainsData):   
            print("...")
    except:
        print("...")   
        exit(1)
    
       #checks for duplicate in name of hosts and in name of SD
    try:
        if SD.checkDuplicateSD(securityDomainsData):
            print("...")
            exit(1)
    except:
        ...
    
    try:
        if checkDuplicateHost(hostsSetupData):
            print("...")
            exit(1)
    except:
        ...
	
	
    #2 update groups data in host config files with SecDom configuration
    try:
        hostsSetupData = SD.merge(hostsSetupData, securityDomainsData)
        with open(sys.argv[1], 'w') as f:
            json.dump(hostsSetupData, f, ensure_ascii=False, indent=4)
    except:
        ...
	
	
    #3 key and crt generation for all hosts
    try:
        Gen.generateCrt(hostsSetupData)
    except:
        ...
	
	
    #4 generation and editing of all config files
    try:
        Gen.generateConf(hostsSetupData)
    except:
	    # can throw an exception if no lightouse is defined in configData
        print("could not find a lighthouse entry in " + sys.argv[1])
    try:
        SD.addFirewallRules(securityDomainsData)
    except:
        ...
	
	
    #5 distribution
    Dist.sendFiles(sys.argv[1])
```

NOTE: At this point I end up with two config files, one with the data containing the ip's and one with the security domains, in this case I have a way to merge the SecDom data into both files and have both options defined earlier to view the structure of my network. The perfect solution would be to completely abandon the manual generation of these files and switch to a software tool to define the entire network and hide the saved file formats from the end user while allowing them to access, view, and modify the information related to the network structure through the tool.

A library was defined to generate node data: [[NebulaAppV2/PythonCode/Generation.py|Generation.py]]
```python
scriptDir = "../scripts/"
outputDir = "../TmpFileGenerated/"
configFilePath = "../config-default.yaml"

def generateCrt(hostsSetupData):
    try:
        for host in hostsSetupData:
            if len(host["groups"]) == 0:
                os.system("./nebula-cert ...")
            else:
                os.system("./nebula-cert ...")
    except:
        raise Exception("Could not parse Data correctly")
```

```python
def generateConf(hostsSetupData):
    try:
        lighthouseIP = getLighthouseIP(hostsSetupData)
    except:
        raise Exception("No lighthouse found in config file")

    for host in hostsSetupData:
        #load YAML file
        yaml=YAML()   # default, if not specfied, is 'rt' (round-trip)
		...
		
        try:
            configFile = open(configFilePath)
            configData = yaml.load(configFile)
        except:
            print("...") 
            exit(1)

        #set data as needed
        if "lighthouse" in host["name"]:  #set lightouse config file
            lighthouseIP = host["nebula_ip"][:-3]
            lighthouseMachIP = host["machine_ip"]
            
            configData["static_host_map"] = {
                    DQSS(lighthouseIP): flist([DQSS(lighthouseMachIP + ":4242")])
                }           #cast to DoubleQuotedScalarString (DQSS) 
			
            configData["lighthouse"]["am_lighthouse"] = True
            configData["lighthouse"]["hosts"] = [DQSS(lighthouseIP)]
            configData["relay"]["am_relay"] = True
			...
            configData["firewall"]["inbound"] = [{'port': 'any', 'proto': 'any', 'host': 'any'}]  #connection with the lightouse is always allowed by default

        else:       #set host config file
            configData["static_host_map"] = {
                    DQSS(lighthouseIP): flist([DQSS(lighthouseMachIP + ":4242")])
                }
            configData["lighthouse"]["am_lighthouse"] = False
            configData["lighthouse"]["hosts"] = [DQSS(lighthouseIP)]
			
            configData["relay"] = {
                "relays": [DQSS(lighthouseIP)]
                }       
            configData["relay"]["am_relay"] = False    
            configData["relay"]["use_relays"] = True  
			 ...
            configData["firewall"]["inbound"] = []
            configData["firewall"]["inbound"].append({'port': 'any', 'proto': 'icmp', 'host':'any'})    # ping enabled by default in all the hosts 
		
        #save data in new file called config_HOSTNAME.yaml
        with open(outputDir + "config_" + host["name"] + ".yaml", 'w') as f:
            yaml.dump(configData, f)
```


A second library was defined to implement all SecDom-related functions: [[NebulaAppV2/PythonCode/SecurityDomain.py|SecurityDomain.py]]
``` python
def merge(hostsSetupData, securityDomainsData):
    try:
        for host in hostsSetupData:
            for secDom in securityDomainsData:
                if secDom["name"] in host["groups"]:                #if the SecDom is in the host group list, we check if it needs to be removed
                    if not host["name"] in secDom["hosts"]:
                        host["groups"].remove(secDom["name"])
                elif host["name"] in secDom["hosts"]:               #SecDom is added only if not already present
                    host["groups"].append(secDom["name"])
    except:
        raise Exception("...")
    return hostsSetupData
```
In the merge we pay attention to add a SecDom only if not already present and to remove SecDom in case they are not needed (for possible changes of a previous configuration)

```python
def getHostsList(securityDomainsData):
    try:
        hostsList = []
        for SecDom in securityDomainsData:
            for host in SecDom["hosts"]:
                if not host in hostsList:
                    hostsList.append(host)
        return hostsList
    except:
        raise Exception("...")


def addFirewallRules(securityDomainsData, hostsList = None):
    if hostsList == None:                                               
        try:                                                            
            hostsList = getHostsList(securityDomainsData)               
        except:
            raise Exception("Could not parse Data correctly")

    for host in hostsList:
        #open file as YAML
        yaml=YAML()
        ...
        try:
            configFile = open(outputDir + "config_" + host + ".yaml")
            configData = yaml.load(configFile)
        except:
            print("...") 
            exit(1)
        
        #save old inbound config
        oldConfig = configData["firewall"]["inbound"]                   
        #reset config                                                   
        configData["firewall"]["inbound"] = []
		
        #add rules
        for SecDom in securityDomainsData:
            if host in SecDom["hosts"]:
                configData["firewall"]["inbound"].append({'port': 'any', 'proto': 'any', 'group': SecDom["name"]})
        
        ...
		
		#save previous data if needed
        if not configData["firewall"]["inbound"]:
            configData["firewall"]["inbound"] = oldConfig
		
        #save data in new file
        with open(outputDir + "config_" + host + ".yaml", 'w') as f:
            yaml.dump(configData, f)
```
The optional hostList parameter is given because getHostList is not particularly efficient, there could be a better way of creating that list, the option is left to the programmer.
The list does not need to be limited to only hosts that are part of a SecDom but only host that are part of a SecDom as defined in config file will be considered obviously.

If a host is not part of any SecDom the current configuration should not be overwritten, to achieve this we first save the current inbound configuration and in the end we check if config is still empty, if it is it means the host is not part of any SecDom and we save the previously saved config.
#### Test
In this second version I've runned a test composed of 6 machines including 3 laptops in one SecDom, 2 servers in a different SecDom, and the lighthouse. Two of the three laptops must be able to connect with only one of the servers.
It simulates a distributed server in a cluster of machines with one of them acting as a gate for some of the laptops.
The VagrantFile can be found [here](https://github.com/Lombax99/nebulaProject/blob/main/Vagrant/vagrant_esempio2_nebula/Vagrantfile)

### Edge case - Mistrustful colleagues


### References
- [nebula github](https://github.com/slackhq/nebula)
- [medium: introducing nebula, the open source global overlay network](https://medium.com/several-people-are-coding/introducing-nebula-the-open-source-global-overlay-network-from-slack-884110a5579)
- [nebula doc](https://nebula.defined.net/docs/)
- [nebula quick start](https://nebula.defined.net/docs/guides/quick-start/)
- [nebula config reference](https://nebula.defined.net/docs/config/)
- [nebula official slack](https://join.slack.com/t/nebulaoss/shared_invite/enQtOTA5MDI4NDg3MTg4LTkwY2EwNTI4NzQyMzc0M2ZlODBjNWI3NTY1MzhiOThiMmZlZjVkMTI0NGY4YTMyNjUwMWEyNzNkZTJmYzQxOGU) (Big thanks to the people on the server for their assistance and availability)
- [Project github](https://github.com/Lombax99/nebulaProject/)
